---
layout: post
title: Connecting to the FreeNAS server
image:
    feature: FreeNAS-Logo.png
tags: [Code,Linux,Installation]
modified: 2016-01-20
---

The [FreeNAS] server consists of three, 4TB drives in a ZFS filesystem which is similar
to a raid 5 setup.  This gives a total useable storage size of around 7TB 
and allows for redundancy with one drive able to fail and data still recoverable. 
I will go though some basic steps of how to use the share and set it to backup your home folder
on linux.

- Make sure you have an account on the FreeNAS server 
    * I will be able to setup your account on the server if you're in the research group
- Make sure you can connect to the server
    * In our case the server has two IP addresses on the network `172.21.139.214` and `172.21.139.168`
    * To check if you can connect: 

```bash
ping -c 3 172.21.139.214
```

- Now make sure you have the required packeges to mount network drives 
    * cifs or nfs should work but I will be using cifs for the tutorial.  To change to nfs just replace
    any part that says `cifs` with `nfs`.

```bash
sudo apt-get install cifs-utils smbfs
```

- Make a credentials file in your home directory
    * This file is going to store your username and password so we're going to make sure it has the
    proper security so that it is not readable by everyone.
    * Make a file called `.smbcredentials` in your home folder `~/`.
    * Place this in the file replacing `name` with the username you setup on the FreeNAS server and `****` with 
    the password.

```bash 
username=name
password=****
```

- Change the owner and permissions on the credentials file. 

```bash 
sudo chown root .smbcredentials
sudo chmod 600 .smbcredentials
```

- Now make a folder to mount the FreeNAS server to. Replace `username` with the username on your system. If you don't 
know you can check it with the `whoami` command.

```bash
sudo mkdir /mnt/FreeNAS
sudo chown -R username:username /mnt/FreeNAS
```

- Find your user id and group id using the `id` command. In most cases if you were the first user on the system they both should be `1000`
but it's still a good idea to check.

```bash
uid=1000(username) gid=1000(username) .....
```

- As the root user edit `/etc/fstab` and add this line to the end of the file. Make sure to replace `user` with your
username and `userid` and `groupid` with the id's found in the pervious step.

```bash
//172.21.139.168/backups /mnt/FreeNAS cifs credentials=/home/user/.smbcredentials,isocharset=utf8,sec=ntml,uid=userid,gid=groupid 0 0 0
```

- Now check to see if eveything mounts correctly:

```bash
sudo mount -a 
```


Now your computer should have the FreeNAS server mounted as a drive on your computer in the folder `/mnt/FreeNAS` you 
should be able to look into that directory and find a directory with your name where you can place anything you would
like to backup. The next step will be to setup an automatic backup using rsync.

- Create a file called `backup.sh` and place the following inside of it making sure to change the `username` and `ShareName` 
to your match your name.
    * At a minimum you should exclude `.ssh` and `.smbcredentials` since these contain sensative information.
    * Make sure to add any other folders that may include sensative information.
    * This storage is mainly for your personal files so it is advised to exclude any folder with
    large amounts of raw data which is backed up in other locations.

```bash
#!/bin/bash
rsync -av --exclude='.ssh' --exclude=".smbcredentials" --exclude='Downloads' --exclude='Desktop' /home/username /mnt/FreeNAS/ShareName
```

- You can then move this file to the proper location and create a cronjob so that the script runs every hour during the workday.

```bash
sudo mv backup.sh /usr/local/sbin/
crontab -e 
```

- Add the following to the end of your crontab file.

```bash
0 8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19 * * * /usr/local/sbin/backup.sh

```

If all these steps worked then your computer should backup your home folder everyday of the week from 8am-7pm.
You can change this by editing the time you added to your crontab file.

[FreeNAS]: (http://www.freenas.org/)